According to the latest data from the General Statistics Office, the Ministry of Planning and Investment, in 2020 there will be a total of 101.7 thousand enterprises suspending business for a definite time, stopping operations pending dissolution and completing procedures. continued dissolution, up 13.9% over the previous year.

On average, nearly 8.5 thousand businesses withdraw from the market every month. This is an unprecedented number in the past 10 years.

The fact that enterprises are forced to suspend, wait for bankruptcy, and complete dissolution procedures has increased at this time, reflecting the difficulty of production and business conditions and the aggregate demand of a number of industries that has been falling deeply due to impact of the Covid-19 pandemic.

Predicting financial distress has been a topic of interest for many decades because of its significance to listed firms, interested stakeholders (which includes financial institutions, investors, government and researchers) and the country’s economy. Financial distress occurs when a company fails to meet its debt obligations to its creditors at maturity. Prolonged and severe financial hardship can lead to bankruptcy.

Traditionally, the assessment of a company's financial distress situation was primarily based on the subjective judgment of experts. However, this expert-based approach has several drawbacks, including inconsistent results that cannot be validated and are highly dependent on knowledgeable competence. As a result, other approaches to improving consistency and accuracy have been developed. These classification techniques are divided into two types: statistical methods and machine learning methods. In Vietnam, statistical methods have been widely used to predict financial distress, but machine learning methods have not been used much. In this study, I aim to apply machine learning and enhance the explainability of forecasting results based on the data of listed companies in Vietnam.
